



Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                             4 August 2025
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: 5 February 2026


            Architectural Considerations of Age Restriction
              draft-nottingham-iab-age-restrictions-latest

Abstract

   Around the world, policymakers are considering (and in some cases
   implementing) age restriction systems for Internet content.  This
   document explores the unwanted impacts on the Internet that these
   systems are likely to have and makes recommendations about the
   properties they should have, if they are to be a successful part of
   the Internet infrastructure.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-iab-age-
   restrictions/.

   information can be found at https://mnot.github.io/I-D/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/age.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 5 February 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Risks of Age Restriction
     2.1.  Centralization
     2.2.  Privacy and Security
     2.3.  Barriers to Access
     2.4.  Fragmentation
     2.5.  An Age-Gated Internet
   3.  Recommendations for Age Restriction Systems
     3.1.  Content Marking
     3.2.  Distributed Implementation
   4.  IANA Considerations
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Increasingly, policymakers are proposing and implementing regulation
   that restricts what content young people can access online.  A
   recurring theme in these efforts is that it is no longer considered
   sufficient to rely on self-assertions of age, and so stronger
   guarantees are deemed necessary.

   Age restrictions are already deployed on the Internet: for example,
   some Web sites already require proof of age to create an account.
   However, when such deployments become more prevalent, they tend to
   have greater impact upon the Internet architecture, thereby
   endangering other properties that we depend upon for a healthy online
   ecosystem.  Systems that are designed for deployment in a single,
   homogenous domain rarely are suitable for the diversity of
   requirements and considerations that apply to Internet-scale systems.

   Section 2 catalogues the risks that such systems might incur,
   expressed in terms of the Internet's architectural principles.
   Section 3 suggests the properties that an age restriction system
   should have to be a healthy part of the Internet infrastructure.

2.  Risks of Age Restriction

   This section catalogues risks that age restriction systems might
   encounter, expressed in terms of the Internet's architectural
   principles.

2.1.  Centralization

   Inherently, any age restriction system involves controlling access to
   content and services on the Internet.  That control -- along with the
   potential for access to information about people's activities online
   that comes with it -- is immensely valuable to various parties, often
   for purposes other than those that policymakers have in mind.

   How and where that control is exercised thus becomes an important
   consideration.

   For example, if an age restriction system requires verification by a
   single party, that party will have access to a significant amount of
   sensitive information about people's activities on the Internet.
   Such systems can be leveraged for a variety of purposes beyond those
   intended by policymakers -- both by that party itself, and by
   individuals, organized criminals, and nation-state actors who are
   able to perform successful cyber attacks against it.

   It also means that any party operating the system has extraordinary
   access, and thus risk of abuse, especially if their incentives are
   not aligned with other participants in the system.

   In both cases, having only one entity operating the system increases
   the associated risks dramatically, as this effectively centralizes
   control in their hands while simultaneously presenting a single
   target to attackers.

   Even when multiple parties provide verification services,
   centralization can emerge if there is too much friction against user
   switching between them.  For example, if Web sites rather than end
   users select the verification service used, this does not create a
   market that respects end user preferences; it only respects the self-
   interest of sites.

   Age restriction systems can also have secondary effects that lead to
   centralization.  For example, if an age restriction system requires
   use of a particular Web browser (or a small number of them), that
   effectively distorts the market for Web browsers.

   Thus, centralisation is a primary consideration for age restriction
   systems.  Internet infrastructure is designed in a way to avoid
   centralization where it is technically possible, or to mitigate
   centralization risks where it is not.  Since there is nothing
   inherently centralized about determining a person's age -- i.e.,
   there are many ways to come to that conclusion -- centralization
   should be avoided, not merely mitigated, in these systems.

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST: * Avoid reliance on a single party
   to provide age verification services * Provide some mechanism for
   easy switching between verification services by end users * Avoid
   requiring use of an arbitrarily limited set of operating systems, Web
   browsers, client programs, or other software or hardware

   [CENTRALIZATION] explores these issues greater detail.

2.2.  Privacy and Security

   It is technically challenging to design an age restriction system
   that exhibits the security and privacy properties expected of
   Internet standards.  Exposing information about Internet users to
   third parties -- whether verifiers, services, or others -- creates
   powerful incentives.  In particular, commercial interests desire
   access to it to be able to track activity across the Internet so that
   this can be sold (to advertisers, insurers and others), and so they
   will use (and abuse) any facility that offers such information to
   learn about what people are doing.

   Critically, even small amounts of information can aid these purposes,
   because they can be aggregated with other information (like IP
   addresses, browser characteristics, and so on) to create a unique
   identifier for each Internet user.

   In this context, age restriction systems can introduce several new
   risks to the Internet.

   Most immediately, a system that reveals the age (or birthdate) of
   Internet users to services on it is a privacy risk.  A person's age
   is an attribute that can be used to discriminate against them without
   justification, and is legally protected by privacy law in many
   jurisdictions.

   Beyond that immediate risk, verifying services' potential access to
   personal information creates a powerful incentive for misuse --
   whether as part of the business model of the verifying service, or by
   third parties (such as nation-state attackers).

   This is the case when verifying services over-collect such
   information (for example, age estimation services that use photos and
   biometrics), and it is also the case when users' activity is exposed
   to the verifying service when age restriction takes place.  The
   latter risk is similar to the risk of tracking and profiling seen on
   the Web, which the Internet standards community has expended
   considerable effort to mitigate (see e.g., [RFC7258]).

   Furthermore, exposing information beyond age to services creates
   additional privacy and security risks.  For example, an age
   verification system that also exposes the country a person is a
   citizen of allows sites to discriminate against that attribute, which
   is beyond the purpose of age restriction.

   Finally, even on its own a simple attribute like 'age in years' or
   'birthdate' can be used to add entropy to an identifier for the end
   user, creating a new tracking vector when exposed to services that
   collect such information.  See [TRACKING].

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST: * Avoid over-collection of
   information by age verifiers * Avoid sharing information about
   service usage with age verifiers * Avoid sharing information other
   than age information with services * Minimise the amount of age
   information shared with services (e.g., using age brackets)

   See also [PRIVACY].

2.3.  Barriers to Access

   Many existant proposals for age restriction systems require its users
   to have certain capabilities -- for example, a personal smartphone, a
   government credential, or a camera with certain resolution.

   Imposing these requirements means that some number of people will be
   disenfranchised from full use of the Internet – especially if age
   restriction becomes pervasive across many services.  At the scale of
   the entire Internet (or even in a single country), this can be a
   large number of disenfranchised people.

   For example, many people only have Internet access from public
   computers (such as those in libraries), and do not have exclusive or
   reliable access to a smartphone.  Others lack government-issued
   identity documents that some schemes rely upon.

   While such restrictions may be palatable in a closed system (such as
   on a single platform or in a single jurisdiction), they are not
   suitable for Internet-wide deployment.

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST: * Avoid requiring hardware
   capabilities not widely available in desktop and mobile computers
   globally, both in terms of performance and specific features * Avoid
   relying on a single mechanism for proving age

2.4.  Fragmentation

   If an age restriction system relies too much on legal controls rather
   than technical capabilities, those controls are likely to be
   inconsistently applied in different jurisdictions, leading to
   different experiences for Internet users around the globe.

   Likewise, a solution that requires special access to computers (such
   as in “trusted platform modules” or otherwise mandates conformance on
   people’s computers introduces a risk of limiting the kinds of
   computers that can be used on the Internet – for example, Open Source
   Operating Systems and Web browsers are generally unable to provide
   such assurances.

   While these tradeoffs may be reasonable in a single jurisdiction, too
   many differences will create barriers to Internet-wide deployment of
   services, creating not only centralization risks, but also
   fragmentation risks -- that the Internet will work in different ways
   depending on where you are.

2.5.  An Age-Gated Internet

   The Internet is designed to be used without permission, both be
   servers and clients.  Easy-to-use age restriction mechanisms risk
   creating a ‘papers please’ Internet, where a credential is required
   to access large portions of the Internet.  Such an outcome would
   amplify the other harms listed.

   This risk is heightened if there are incentives for sites to deploy
   it, such as access to non-age data.

   Access to more granular age information also heightens many risks,
   because it makes a restriction system simultaneously useful in a
   broader variety of cases, and more attractive for misuse, because it
   offers more information about users.

3.  Recommendations for Age Restriction Systems

3.1.  Content Marking

3.2.  Distributed Implementation

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no instructions for IANA.

5.  Security Considerations

   Age restriction systems undoubtedly have numerous security
   considerations, should they be deployed.

6.  Informative References

   [CENTRALIZATION]
              Nottingham, M., "Centralization, Decentralization, and
              Internet Standards", RFC 9518, DOI 10.17487/RFC9518,
              December 2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9518>.

   [PRIVACY]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6973, July 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6973>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7258>.

   [TRACKING] W3C TAG, "Unsanctioned Web Tracking", July 2015,
              <https://www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/unsanctioned-tracking/>.

Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham
   Melbourne
   Australia
   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/
