



Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                             June 24, 2020
Intended status: Informational
Expires: December 26, 2020


                             Greasing HTTP
                    draft-nottingham-http-grease-00

Abstract

   Like many network protocols, HTTP is vulnerable to ossification of
   its extensibility points.  This draft specifies how they should be
   exercised ('greased') to assure their continued usability.

Note to Readers

   _RFC EDITOR: please remove this section before publication_

   The issues list for this draft can be found at
   https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/http-grease [1].

   The most recent (often, unpublished) draft is at
   https://mnot.github.io/I-D/http-grease/ [2].

   Recent changes are listed at https://github.com/mnot/I-D/commits/gh-
   pages/http-grease [3].

   See also the draft's current status in the IETF datatracker, at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-http-grease/ [4].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 26, 2020.




Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  What to Grease? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  How to Grease?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.3.  Notational Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  The HTTP Grease Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Greasing HTTP Request Header Fields . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Greasing HTTP Request Cache Directives  . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.3.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Appendix A.  Bootstrapping the HTTP Grease Process  . . . . . . .   8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   Like many network protocols, HTTP is vulnerable to ossification of
   its extensibility points.  Those that are rarely exercised risk
   'rusting shut' because recipients assume that they will not be used.
   This happens in practice for several reasons, including implementer
   convenience, performance optimisation, or traffic characterisation.

   Because extensibility is a primary mechanism for protocol evolution,
   it is important to keep these extension points flexible.  For points
   that are rarely used, one proven way (pioneered by [RFC8701]) to
   assure this is through sending 'grease' values - i.e., extension
   values that are hard to predict and have no effect on correct
   protocol operation.





Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


   This document specifies how HTTP's extension points should be
   greased, to assure their continued usability.  It focuses on generic
   HTTP features; other documents cover versioned extensibility points
   (e.g., see [I-D.bishop-httpbis-grease]).

1.1.  What to Grease?

   HTTP has several extension mechanisms.  While keeping all of them
   available for use is desirable, this document currently targets two
   specific extensibility points - HTTP request header fields and
   request cache directives - for a few reasons.

   Some extension points are not practical to grease.  For example,
   introducing new HTTP methods is important, but greasing them would
   require sending requests beyond those intended by the user.  Beyond
   the overhead of doing so, failure of those requests is not likely to
   create an incentive to allow those requests, because that failure is
   not user visible.

   Other extension points are already effectively ossified: for example,
   range units.  While it might be possible to introduce a new range
   unit in the future (with enough effort), there is not much desire to
   do so in the community at this point, and the risk of greasing it
   causing too many failures is high.

   Greasing aspects of HTTP responses (such as header fields or cache
   control directives) is not addressed in this document because current
   Web traffic already effectively greases them.  For example, the
   breadth of unrecognised headers sent from HTTP servers effectively
   keeps response header fields greased; likewise with response cache-
   control directives.

   Future revisions might address other extensibility points (including
   those listed above), based upon discussion and feedback.

1.2.  How to Grease?

   Greasing has the goal of keeping protocol extension points flexible -
   that is, it should remain possible to introduce new values with
   negligible risk of interoperability problems.  By necessity, this is
   not absolute; an implementation determined to control input values
   can anticipate grease values and allow them, while denying other
   extensions.

   As a result, one of the tradeoffs in a greasing mechanism is between
   making the values difficult to anticipate and the complexity of the
   mechanism.  One that is hard to anticipate typically requires hard-
   to-predict values generated by an algorithm, with a corresponding



Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


   prohibition on registration of those values.  Even then, a determined
   implementation could use heuristics to identify and allow grease
   values, while blocking others.  On the other hand, an easily
   predictable value can be added to an allow list in implementations,
   while they still block unknown values.

   This document's initial goal is to make it possible to deploy new
   standards-defined values with a suitable notice period, rather than
   to allow any implementation to introduce new values at any time.  To
   meet that goal, a 'HTTP grease process' is defined, whereby grease
   values are periodically announced and later sent by implementations,
   so that receiving implementations have enough time to assure
   interoperability.

1.3.  Notational Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  The HTTP Grease Process

   There are a few parties involved in the greasing of an HTTP
   extensibility point.  They are:

   o  Grease senders - implementers and operators of HTTP deployments
      that send grease extensions

   o  Grease recipients - implementers and operators of HTTP deployments
      that receive grease extensions

   o  The grease coordinator - a person appointed to oversee the HTTP
      grease process

   To aid communication between these parties, a mailing list (TBD) has
   been created for announcements and discussion.

   The grease coordinator is appointed by the ART Area Director(s), in
   consultation with the HTTP Working Group chair(s).

   On a periodic basis (to be determined by the grease coordinator in
   consultation with grease senders and grease recipients), the grease
   coordinator will announce a new grease value for the extension points
   covered by this process.  Where possible, these values will be
   provisionally registered with IANA, with the note 'grease value' and
   a reference to this specification.



Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


   Such announcements MUST contain the details of the grease value (see
   individual requirements below), and a date on which grease senders
   SHOULD start sending that value.

   Grease senders SHOULD send the grease value on a sizeable fraction of
   traffic (e.g., 1/8th); too small a proportion might be ignored.

   Grease senders MAY selectively send grease values.  For example, a
   Web browser might only send grease on navigation requests, to assure
   that any interoperability problems are clearly visible.

   Grease senders SHOULD NOT send grease values when the request method
   is non-idempotent or unsafe.

   If grease senders or recipients experience widespread
   interoperability problems as the result of deployment of a grease
   value, they SHOULD report this to the grease coordinator, who MAY
   declare that the grease value can be withdrawn by grease senders.
   Grease senders SHOULD NOT act unilaterally in such cases.

   Once a new grease value has been deployed, old grease values SHOULD
   be withdrawn by grease senders.

2.1.  Greasing HTTP Request Header Fields

   Grease values for HTTP request header fields consist of a field name
   and a field value.

   Grease field names SHOULD be hard to predict; e.g., they SHOULD NOT
   have any identifying prefix, suffix, or pattern.  However, they MUST
   NOT be likely to conflict with unregistered or future field names,
   and the grease coordinator MUST avoid potentially offensive or
   confusing terms.  They also MUST conform to the syntactic
   requirements for field names in HTTP ([I-D.ietf-httpbis-semantics],
   Section 4.3).

   This can be achieved in different ways (which SHOULD vary from time
   to time), for example:

   o  Combine two or three dictionary words or proper nouns with a
      hyphen (e.g., 'Skateboard-Clancy', 'Murray-Fortnight-Scout')

   o  Append digits to a dictionary word (e.g., 'Turnstile23')

   o  Generate a string using a hash or similar function (e.g.,
      'dd722785c01b')





Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


   Grease field values can be statically specified in the grease
   announcement, specified to be of a certain type (e.g., using
   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-header-structure] types), or left to the discretion
   of the grease sender.

2.2.  Greasing HTTP Request Cache Directives

   Grease values for HTTP request cache directives consist of a
   directive name and an optional directive value.

   Grease directive names SHOULD be hard to predict; e.g., they SHOULD
   NOT have any identifying prefix, suffix, or pattern.  However, they
   MUST NOT be likely to conflict with unregistered or future directive
   names, and the grease coordinator MUST avoid potentially offensive or
   confusing terms.  They also MUST conform to the syntactic
   requirements for cache directive names in HTTP
   ([I-D.ietf-httpbis-cache], Section 5.2).

   This can be achieved in different ways (which SHOULD vary from time
   to time), for example:

   o  Select a single dictionary word or proper noun (e.g., 'fanciful',
      'imagine')

   o  Combine two dictionary words or proper nouns with a hyphen (e.g.,
      'skateboard-clancy')

   o  Append digits to a dictionary word (e.g., 'turnstile23')

   o  Generate a string using a hash or similar function (e.g.,
      'dd722785c01b')

   Grease field values can be omitted (so there is no '=value'),
   statically specified in the grease announcement, specified to be of a
   certain type (e.g., an integer, a quoted string), or left to the
   discretion of the grease sender.

3.  Security Considerations

   Some HTTP extensibility points are becoming (or have become) ossified
   because of security considerations; receiving implementations believe
   that it is more secure to reject unknown values, or they are able to
   identify undesirable peers through their use of extensions.

   This document does not directly address these concerns, nor does it
   directly disallow such behaviour.  Instead, it aims to encourage the
   ability to accommodate new extensions more quickly than is now
   currently possible.



Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-cache]
              Fielding, R., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Caching", draft-ietf-httpbis-cache-08 (work in progress),
              May 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-semantics]
              Fielding, R., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Semantics", draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-08 (work in
              progress), May 2020.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

4.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bishop-httpbis-grease]
              Bishop, M., "GREASE for HTTP/2", draft-bishop-httpbis-
              grease-00 (work in progress), May 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-header-structure]
              Nottingham, M. and P. Kamp, "Structured Field Values for
              HTTP", draft-ietf-httpbis-header-structure-19 (work in
              progress), June 2020.

   [RFC8701]  Benjamin, D., "Applying Generate Random Extensions And
              Sustain Extensibility (GREASE) to TLS Extensibility",
              RFC 8701, DOI 10.17487/RFC8701, January 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8701>.

4.3.  URIs

   [1] https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/http-grease

   [2] https://mnot.github.io/I-D/http-grease/

   [3] https://github.com/mnot/I-D/commits/gh-pages/http-grease

   [4] https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-http-grease/



Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Greasing HTTP                    June 2020


Appendix A.  Bootstrapping the HTTP Grease Process

   Because the initial focus of this document is on two request
   extension points, the relevant grease senders will be HTTP clients -
   a combination of Web browsers, HTTP client libraries and
   intermediaries (such as CDNs).  The relevant grease recipients will
   be HTTP servers (both on the origin and in intermediaries).

   Broadly speaking, HTTP servers accept these extensions, unless they
   have a Web Application Firewall (WAF) installed.  As such, greasing
   HTTP successfully will require client implementers, WAF vendors, and
   in some cases WAF deployers to work together.

   Clients are likely to be risk-averse; if their implementation alone
   breaks some Web sites, they can face negative consequences (because
   their users can easily flee to other implementations).  Therefore, a
   successful greasing strategy needs to include most or all major
   clients, and their actions need to be coordinated.

   WAF vendors and deployers often do not coordinate behaviour, and may
   not have prompt update mechanisms.  Therefore, a successful greasing
   strategy needs to attract them to into community engagement (e.g.,
   using the mailing list above) and needs to accommodate their needs;
   it is likely they will not be able to deploy updates quickly at
   first, for example.

   As a result, when greasing begins, it will be necessary to have long
   lead times between announcement and sending.  Likewise, initial
   grease values are more likely to succeed (building confidence and
   engagement) if they are static and simple.

Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham

   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/














Nottingham              Expires December 26, 2020               [Page 8]
