

Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                               BEA Systems
Expires: October 18, 2004                                 April 19, 2004


               The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type
                 draft-nottingham-soap-xop-media-reg-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 18, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines the "application/soap_xop+xml" media type which
   can be used to describe SOAP 1.2 messages that have been processed
   using the XOP convention.

1. Notational Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2. Introduction

   SOAP version 1.2 (SOAP) is a lightweight protocol intended for



Nottingham              Expires October 18, 2004                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type   April 2004


   exchange of structured information between peers in a decentralized,
   distributed environment. It defines an extensible messaging framework
   that contains a message construct based on XML technologies that can
   be exchanged over a variety of underlying protocols.

   The XML-binary Optimised Packaging Mechanism (XOP) is an alternate
   serialization of the XML Infoset, intended to make processing and
   representation of certain types of content (specifically, that which
   is base64-encoded) more efficient. Such serialisations, when
   free-standing, are called XOP Packages; the portion of the XOP
   Package that represents the structure and non-optimized content of
   the Infoset are called XOP Documents, and are serialized as XML.

   This specification defines the media type "application/soap_xop+xml"
   which can be used to identify SOAP 1.2 message envelopes that have
   been serialized as XOP Documents using XML 1.0.

   The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type explicitly identifies the
   XOP Document portion of a SOAP 1.2 message envelope, serialized as
   XML 1.0. In other words, it identifies the serialized XML after the
   extraction of any content into the XOP Package; it does not identify
   the package itself.

   XOP Documents not serialized as XML 1.0 or representing message
   envelopes with a different SOAP namespace version MUST NOT use it.

3. Registration

   MIME media type name: application
   MIME subtype name: soap_xop+xml
   Required parameters: none
   Optional parameters:
      "charset": This parameter has identical semantics to the charset
         parameter of the "application/xml" media type as specified in
         RFC 3023 [RFC3023].
      "action": This optional parameter can be used to specify the URI
         that identifies the intent of the message. In SOAP 1.2, it
         serves a similar purpose as the SOAPAction HTTP header field
         did in SOAP 1.1. Namely, its value identifies the intent of the
         message.
         The value of the action parameter is an absolute URI-reference
         as defined by RFC 2396 [RFC2396]. SOAP places no restrictions
         on the specificity of the URI or that it is resolvable.
         Although the purpose of the action parameter is to indicate the
         intent of the SOAP message there is no mechanism for
         automatically computing the value based on the SOAP envelope.
         In other words, the value has to be determined out of band.




Nottingham              Expires October 18, 2004                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type   April 2004


         It is recommended that the same value be used to identify sets
         of message types that are logically connected in some manner,
         for example part of the same "service". It is strongly
         RECOMMENDED that the URI be globally unique and stable over
         time.
         The presence and content of the action parameter MAY be used by
         servers such as firewalls to appropriately filter SOAP messages
         and it may be used by servers to facilitate dispatching of SOAP
         messages to internal message handlers etc. It SHOULD NOT be
         used as an insecure form of access authorization.
         Use of the action parameter is OPTIONAL. SOAP Receivers MAY use
         it as a hint to optimize processing, but SHOULD NOT require its
         presence in order to operate.
   Encoding considerations: Identical to those of "application/xml" as
      described in RFC 3023 [RFC3023], section 3.2, as applied to the
      SOAP envelope infoset.
   Security considerations: Because SOAP can carry application defined
      data whose semantics is independent from that of any MIME wrapper
      (or context within which the MIME wrapper is used), one should not
      expect to be able to understand the semantics of the SOAP message
      based on the semantics of the MIME wrapper alone. Therefore,
      whenever using the "application/soap_xop+xml" media type, it is
      strongly RECOMMENDED that the security implications of the context
      within which the SOAP message is used is fully understood. The
      security implications are likely to involve both the specific SOAP
      binding to an underlying protocol as well as the
      application-defined semantics of the data carried in the SOAP
      message (though one must be careful when doing this, as discussed
      in SOAP 1.2 Part 1 [W3C.REC-soap12-part1-20030624], section
      Binding to Application-Specific Protocols.
      [XOP-specific security considerations]
      Also, see SOAP 1.2 Part 1 [W3C.REC-soap12-part1-20030624], the
      entire section Security Considerations.
      In addition, as this media type uses the "+xml" convention, it
      shares the same security considerations as described in RFC 3023
      [RFC3023], section 10.
   Interoperability considerations: There are no known interoperability
      issues.
   Published specification: SOAP 1.2 Part 1
      [W3C.REC-soap12-part1-20030624], SOAP 1.2 Part 2
      [W3C.REC-soap12-part2-20030624], and XOP [XXX].
   Applications which use this media type: No known applications
      currently use this media type.

   Additional information:






Nottingham              Expires October 18, 2004                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type   April 2004


   File extension: SOAP messages are not required or expected to be
      stored as files.
   Fragment identifiers: Identical to that of "application/xml" as
      described in RFC 3023 [RFC3023], section 5.
   Base URI: As specified in RFC 3023 [RFC3023], section 6. Also see
      SOAP 1.2 Part 1 [W3C.REC-soap12-part1-20030624], section Use of
      URIs in SOAP.
   Macintosh File Type code: TEXT
   Person and email address to contact for further information: Mark
      Nottingham <mnot@pobox.com>
   Intended usage: COMMON
   Author/Change controller: The SOAP 1.2 specification set is a work
      product of the World Wide Web Consortium's XML Protocol Working
      Group. The W3C has change control over these specifications.

References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2396]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396,
              August 1998.

   [RFC3023]  Murata, M., St. Laurent, S. and D. Kohn, "XML Media
              Types", RFC 3023, January 2001.

   [W3C.REC-soap12-part1-20030624]
              Hadley, M., Mendelsohn, N., Moreau, J., Nielsen, H. and M.
              Gudgin, "SOAP Version 1.2 Part 1: Messaging Framework",
              W3C REC REC-soap12-part1-20030624, June 2003.

   [W3C.REC-soap12-part2-20030624]
              Moreau, J., Nielsen, H., Gudgin, M., Hadley, M. and N.
              Mendelsohn, "SOAP Version 1.2 Part 2: Adjuncts", W3C REC
              REC-soap12-part2-20030624, June 2003.


Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham
   BEA Systems
   235 Montgomery St., Level 15
   San Francisco, CA  94010
   US

   EMail: mailto:mnot@pobox.com




Nottingham              Expires October 18, 2004                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type   April 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Nottingham              Expires October 18, 2004                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    The "application/soap_xop+xml" media type   April 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Nottingham              Expires October 18, 2004                [Page 6]
