



Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                           19 January 2026
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: 23 July 2026


            Architectural Considerations of Age Restriction
              draft-nottingham-iab-age-restrictions-latest

Abstract

   Around the world, policymakers are considering (and in some cases
   implementing) age restriction systems for Internet content.  This
   document explores the unwanted impacts on the Internet that these
   systems are likely to have, and makes recommendations to increase
   their chances of becoming a successful part of the Internet
   infrastructure.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-iab-age-
   restrictions/.

   information can be found at https://mnot.github.io/I-D/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/age.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 23 July 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Risks of Age Restriction
     2.1.  Centralization
     2.2.  Privacy and Security
     2.3.  Barriers to Access
     2.4.  Fragmentation
     2.5.  An Age-Gated Internet
   3.  IANA Considerations
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Increasingly, policymakers are proposing and implementing regulation
   that restricts what content young people can access online.  A
   recurring theme in these efforts is that it is no longer considered
   sufficient to rely on self-assertions of age, and so stronger
   guarantees are deemed necessary.

   Age restrictions are already deployed on the Internet: for example,
   some Web sites already require proof of age to create an account.
   However, when such deployments become more prevalent, they tend to
   have greater impact upon the Internet architecture, thereby
   endangering other properties that we depend upon for a healthy online
   ecosystem.  Systems that are designed for deployment in a single,
   homogenous domain rarely are suitable for the diversity of
   requirements and considerations that apply to Internet-scale systems.

   Section 2 explores the unwanted impacts on the Internet that these
   systems are likely to have, and makes recommendations to increase
   their chances of becoming a successful part of the Internet
   infrastructure.

2.  Risks of Age Restriction

   This section catalogues risks that age restriction systems might
   encounter, expressed in terms of the Internet's architectural
   principles.

2.1.  Centralization

   One of the defining characteristics of the Internet's architecture is
   its avoidance of "gatekeeper" roles where a single entity (or small
   number of them) has unavoidable access to or control over
   communications.  This architecture makes the Internet more resilient
   and avoids problematic concentrations of power.

   Inherently, any age restriction system involves controlling access to
   content and services on the Internet.  When that system's use is
   legally required, it can be characterized as being centralized.
   However, that centralization is mitigated (to some degree) by the
   governance mechanisms that legitimize the legal basis of the system.

   However, other forms of centralization can occur in age verification
   systems that are more avoidable.  For example, many proposed age
   restriction systems require verification by a single party.  This is
   not how Internet-scale services are designed, because of the many
   risks incurred:

   First, that single operator will have access to a significant amount
   of sensitive information about people's activities on the Internet.
   Such a system is vulnerable to cyberattacks by organized criminals
   and nation-state actors.  Centralizing so much sensitive data in one
   place creates an irresistible 'honey pot' for attackers.

   Second, that single operator will also have extraordinary access to
   that same data.  Without very strong controls, they will be tempted
   to leverage that access (e.g., by reselling it, or 'insights' into
   the data collected).  This is especially true if their incentives are
   not aligned with end users and services (e.g., if they have a profit
   motive and little opportunity for additional revenue).

   Third, any failure -- whether technical or business -- by that single
   operator creates an outage for all users dependant upon it.  If the
   problem is significant, that outage may extend for a considerable
   amount of time.

   In all of these cases, having only one entity operating the system
   increases the associated risks dramatically.

   Even when multiple parties provide verification services,
   centralization can emerge if there is too much friction against user
   switching between them.  For example, if Web sites rather than end
   users select the verification service used, this does not create a
   market that respects end user preferences; it only respects the self-
   interest of sites.

   Finally, age restriction systems can also have secondary effects that
   lead to centralization.  For example, if an age restriction system
   requires use of a particular Web browser (or a small number of them),
   that effectively distorts the market for Web browsers.

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST:

   *  Avoid reliance on a single party to provide age verification
      services

   *  Provide some mechanism for easy switching between verification
      services by end users

   *  Avoid requiring use of an arbitrarily limited set of operating
      systems, Web browsers, client programs, or other software or
      hardware

   [CENTRALIZATION] explores these issues greater detail.

2.2.  Privacy and Security

   It is technically challenging to design an age restriction system
   that exhibits the security and privacy properties expected of
   Internet standards.  Exposing information about Internet users to
   third parties -- whether verifiers, services, or others -- creates
   powerful incentives.  In particular, commercial interests desire
   access to it to be able to track activity across the Internet so that
   this can be sold (to advertisers, insurers and others), and so they
   will use (and abuse) any facility that offers such information to
   learn about what people are doing.

   In this context, age restriction systems can introduce several new
   risks to the Internet.

   Most immediately, a system that reveals the age (or birthdate) of
   Internet users to services on it is a privacy risk.  A person's age
   is an attribute that can be used to discriminate against them without
   justification, and is legally protected by privacy law in many
   jurisdictions.

   Beyond that immediate risk, verifying services' potential access to
   personal information creates a powerful incentive for misuse --
   whether as part of the business model of the verifying service, or by
   third parties (such as nation-state attackers).

   This is the case when verifying services over-collect such
   information (for example, age estimation services that use photos and
   biometrics), and it is also the case when users' activity is exposed
   to the verifying service when age restriction takes place.  The
   latter risk is similar to the risk of tracking and profiling seen on
   the Web, which the Internet standards community has expended
   considerable effort to mitigate (see e.g., [RFC7258]).

   Furthermore, exposing information beyond age to services creates
   additional privacy and security risks.  For example, an age
   verification system that also exposes the country a person is a
   citizen of allows sites to discriminate against that attribute, which
   is beyond the purpose of age restriction.

   Finally, even on its own a simple attribute like 'age in years' or
   'birthdate' can be used to add entropy to an identifier for the end
   user (in combination with other information, such as IP addresses,
   browser characteristics, and so on), creating a new tracking vector
   when exposed to services that collect such information.  See
   [TRACKING].

   In all cases, the privacy and security of an age restriction system
   needs to be proven: considerable experience has shown that merely
   trusting assertions of these properties is ill-founded.  Likewise,
   because data that is not collected cannot be shared or stolen, a
   system that uses technical means to limit data collection and usage
   is preferable over one that uses legal means (such as contractual
   terms).

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST:

   *  Avoid over-collection of information by age verifiers

   *  Avoid sharing information about service usage with age verifiers

   *  Avoid sharing information other than age information with services

   *  Minimise the amount of age information shared with services (e.g.,
      using age brackets)

   *  Provide technical limitations to the collection and use of data

   *  Be based upon publicly available specifications that have had
      adequate security and privacy review to the level that Internet
      standards are held to

   See also [PRIVACY].

2.3.  Barriers to Access

   Many existant proposals for age restriction systems require its users
   to have certain capabilities -- for example, a personal smartphone, a
   government credential, or a camera with certain resolution.

   Imposing these requirements means that some number of people will be
   disenfranchised from full use of the Internet – especially if age
   restriction becomes pervasive across many services.  At the scale of
   the entire Internet (or even in a single country), this can be a
   large number of disenfranchised people.

   For example, many people only have Internet access from public
   computers (such as those in libraries), and do not have exclusive or
   reliable access to a smartphone.  Others lack government-issued
   identity documents that some schemes rely upon.

   While such restrictions may be palatable in a closed system (such as
   on a single platform or in a single jurisdiction), they are not
   suitable for Internet-wide deployment.

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST:

   *  Avoid requiring hardware capabilities not widely available in
      desktop and mobile computers globally, both in terms of overall
      performance and specific features

   *  Avoid relying on a single mechanism for proving age

2.4.  Fragmentation

   The likelihood of incompatible age restriction systems being deployed
   in different jurisdictions around the world introduces a risk of
   fragmentation -- i.e., that the Internet will not work the same way
   in different places.

   Fragmentation is a growing concern for the Internet: various local
   requirements are creating friction against global deployment of new
   applications, protocols, and capabilities.  As the Internet
   fragments, the benefits of having a single, globe-spanning networking
   technology are correspondingly lessened.  Although a single factor
   (such as diverging approaches to age restriction) is unlikely to
   fragment the Internet on its own, the sum of such divergences
   increases the risk of fragmentation greatly, risking the viability of
   the Internet itself.

   In the context of age restriction, fragmentation is most concerning
   if someone were to need to understand and interact with (possibly
   after some onboarding procedure) a new system for each jurisdiction
   they visit.  This would represent a significant barrier for users who
   travel, and would also present increased complexity and regulatory
   burden for businesses, potentially leading to further lack of
   competitiveness in some industries by increasing costs.

   Fragmentation is best addressed by adoption of common technical
   standards across jurisdictions.

   However, it is important to recognise that the mere existence of an
   international standard does not imply that it is suitable for
   deployment: experience has shown that voluntary adoption by
   implementers is important to prove their viability.

   Furthermore, standards do not necessarily enforce interoperability
   and the architectural goals that they espouse: if they allow too much
   interpretation of their application (for example, through optional-
   to-implement features, or too-generous extensibility mechanisms),
   they can fall short of these goals and only provide "air cover" for
   those who wish to claim standards compliance, without actually
   serving public interest goals -- thereby leading to fragmentation.

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST:

   *  Be based upon internationally recognised, open technical standards

   *  Be based upon technical standards that are voluntarily adopted by
      implementers

   *  Be specified in a manner that provides interoperability and
      ensures architectural alignment

   *  Be coordinated across jurisdictions wherever feasible

2.5.  An Age-Gated Internet

   The Internet is designed to be used without permission, both be
   servers and clients.  Easy-to-use age restriction mechanisms risk
   creating a ‘papers please’ Internet, where a credential is required
   to access large portions of the Internet's services.  Such an outcome
   would amplify the other harms listed.

   This risk is heightened if there are incentives for sites to deploy
   it, such as increased access to non-age data.

   Access to more granular age information also heightens many risks,
   because it makes a restriction system simultaneously useful in a
   broader variety of cases, and more attractive for misuse, because it
   offers more information about users.

   Therefore, age restriction systems that are intended to become part
   of Internet infrastructure MUST:

   *  Make the use of age restrictions visible to end users

   *  Have a structural disincentive for indiscriminate use of age
      restriction

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no instructions for IANA.

4.  Security Considerations

   Age restriction systems undoubtedly have numerous security
   considerations, should they be deployed.

5.  Informative References

   [CENTRALIZATION]
              Nottingham, M., "Centralization, Decentralization, and
              Internet Standards", RFC 9518, DOI 10.17487/RFC9518,
              December 2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9518>.

   [PRIVACY]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6973, July 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6973>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7258>.

   [TRACKING] W3C TAG, "Unsanctioned Web Tracking", July 2015,
              <https://www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/unsanctioned-tracking/>.

Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham
   Melbourne
   Australia
   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/
